% Options for packages loaded elsewhere
\PassOptionsToPackage{unicode}{hyperref}
\PassOptionsToPackage{hyphens}{url}
\PassOptionsToPackage{dvipsnames,svgnames,x11names}{xcolor}
%
\documentclass[
  12pt,
]{article}

\usepackage{amsmath,amssymb}
\usepackage{setspace}
\usepackage{iftex}
\ifPDFTeX
  \usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
  \usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
  \usepackage{textcomp} % provide euro and other symbols
\else % if luatex or xetex
  \usepackage{unicode-math}
  \defaultfontfeatures{Scale=MatchLowercase}
  \defaultfontfeatures[\rmfamily]{Ligatures=TeX,Scale=1}
\fi
\usepackage{lmodern}
\ifPDFTeX\else  
    % xetex/luatex font selection
\fi
% Use upquote if available, for straight quotes in verbatim environments
\IfFileExists{upquote.sty}{\usepackage{upquote}}{}
\IfFileExists{microtype.sty}{% use microtype if available
  \usepackage[]{microtype}
  \UseMicrotypeSet[protrusion]{basicmath} % disable protrusion for tt fonts
}{}
\makeatletter
\@ifundefined{KOMAClassName}{% if non-KOMA class
  \IfFileExists{parskip.sty}{%
    \usepackage{parskip}
  }{% else
    \setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
    \setlength{\parskip}{6pt plus 2pt minus 1pt}}
}{% if KOMA class
  \KOMAoptions{parskip=half}}
\makeatother
\usepackage{xcolor}
\setlength{\emergencystretch}{3em} % prevent overfull lines
\setcounter{secnumdepth}{-\maxdimen} % remove section numbering
% Make \paragraph and \subparagraph free-standing
\ifx\paragraph\undefined\else
  \let\oldparagraph\paragraph
  \renewcommand{\paragraph}[1]{\oldparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi
\ifx\subparagraph\undefined\else
  \let\oldsubparagraph\subparagraph
  \renewcommand{\subparagraph}[1]{\oldsubparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi


\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}\usepackage{longtable,booktabs,array}
\usepackage{calc} % for calculating minipage widths
% Correct order of tables after \paragraph or \subparagraph
\usepackage{etoolbox}
\makeatletter
\patchcmd\longtable{\par}{\if@noskipsec\mbox{}\fi\par}{}{}
\makeatother
% Allow footnotes in longtable head/foot
\IfFileExists{footnotehyper.sty}{\usepackage{footnotehyper}}{\usepackage{footnote}}
\makesavenoteenv{longtable}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\makeatletter
\def\maxwidth{\ifdim\Gin@nat@width>\linewidth\linewidth\else\Gin@nat@width\fi}
\def\maxheight{\ifdim\Gin@nat@height>\textheight\textheight\else\Gin@nat@height\fi}
\makeatother
% Scale images if necessary, so that they will not overflow the page
% margins by default, and it is still possible to overwrite the defaults
% using explicit options in \includegraphics[width, height, ...]{}
\setkeys{Gin}{width=\maxwidth,height=\maxheight,keepaspectratio}
% Set default figure placement to htbp
\makeatletter
\def\fps@figure{htbp}
\makeatother
% definitions for citeproc citations
\NewDocumentCommand\citeproctext{}{}
\NewDocumentCommand\citeproc{mm}{%
  \begingroup\def\citeproctext{#2}\cite{#1}\endgroup}
\makeatletter
 % allow citations to break across lines
 \let\@cite@ofmt\@firstofone
 % avoid brackets around text for \cite:
 \def\@biblabel#1{}
 \def\@cite#1#2{{#1\if@tempswa , #2\fi}}
\makeatother
\newlength{\cslhangindent}
\setlength{\cslhangindent}{1.5em}
\newlength{\csllabelwidth}
\setlength{\csllabelwidth}{3em}
\newenvironment{CSLReferences}[2] % #1 hanging-indent, #2 entry-spacing
 {\begin{list}{}{%
  \setlength{\itemindent}{0pt}
  \setlength{\leftmargin}{0pt}
  \setlength{\parsep}{0pt}
  % turn on hanging indent if param 1 is 1
  \ifodd #1
   \setlength{\leftmargin}{\cslhangindent}
   \setlength{\itemindent}{-1\cslhangindent}
  \fi
  % set entry spacing
  \setlength{\itemsep}{#2\baselineskip}}}
 {\end{list}}
\usepackage{calc}
\newcommand{\CSLBlock}[1]{\hfill\break\parbox[t]{\linewidth}{\strut\ignorespaces#1\strut}}
\newcommand{\CSLLeftMargin}[1]{\parbox[t]{\csllabelwidth}{\strut#1\strut}}
\newcommand{\CSLRightInline}[1]{\parbox[t]{\linewidth - \csllabelwidth}{\strut#1\strut}}
\newcommand{\CSLIndent}[1]{\hspace{\cslhangindent}#1}

\usepackage{booktabs}
\usepackage{longtable}
\usepackage{array}
\usepackage{multirow}
\usepackage{wrapfig}
\usepackage{float}
\usepackage{colortbl}
\usepackage{pdflscape}
\usepackage{tabu}
\usepackage{threeparttable}
\usepackage{threeparttablex}
\usepackage[normalem]{ulem}
\usepackage{makecell}
\usepackage{xcolor}
\usepackage{lineno}\linenumbers
\usepackage{amsmath}
\usepackage{graphicx,psfrag,epsf}
\usepackage{enumerate}
\usepackage{url}
\addtolength{\oddsidemargin}{-.5in}%
\addtolength{\evensidemargin}{-.5in}%
\addtolength{\textwidth}{1in}%
\addtolength{\textheight}{1.3in}%
\addtolength{\topmargin}{-.8in}%
\usepackage[noblocks]{authblk}
\renewcommand*{\Authsep}{, }
\renewcommand*{\Authand}{, }
\renewcommand*{\Authands}{, }
\renewcommand\Affilfont{\small}
\makeatletter
\@ifpackageloaded{caption}{}{\usepackage{caption}}
\AtBeginDocument{%
\ifdefined\contentsname
  \renewcommand*\contentsname{Table of contents}
\else
  \newcommand\contentsname{Table of contents}
\fi
\ifdefined\listfigurename
  \renewcommand*\listfigurename{List of Figures}
\else
  \newcommand\listfigurename{List of Figures}
\fi
\ifdefined\listtablename
  \renewcommand*\listtablename{List of Tables}
\else
  \newcommand\listtablename{List of Tables}
\fi
\ifdefined\figurename
  \renewcommand*\figurename{Figure}
\else
  \newcommand\figurename{Figure}
\fi
\ifdefined\tablename
  \renewcommand*\tablename{Table}
\else
  \newcommand\tablename{Table}
\fi
}
\@ifpackageloaded{float}{}{\usepackage{float}}
\floatstyle{ruled}
\@ifundefined{c@chapter}{\newfloat{codelisting}{h}{lop}}{\newfloat{codelisting}{h}{lop}[chapter]}
\floatname{codelisting}{Listing}
\newcommand*\listoflistings{\listof{codelisting}{List of Listings}}
\makeatother
\makeatletter
\makeatother
\makeatletter
\@ifpackageloaded{caption}{}{\usepackage{caption}}
\@ifpackageloaded{subcaption}{}{\usepackage{subcaption}}
\makeatother
\ifLuaTeX
  \usepackage{selnolig}  % disable illegal ligatures
\fi
\usepackage{bookmark}

\IfFileExists{xurl.sty}{\usepackage{xurl}}{} % add URL line breaks if available
\urlstyle{same} % disable monospaced font for URLs
\hypersetup{
  colorlinks=true,
  linkcolor={blue},
  filecolor={Maroon},
  citecolor={Blue},
  urlcolor={Blue},
  pdfcreator={LaTeX via pandoc}}




\date{}
\begin{document}

\setstretch{2}
\textbf{Title:} The use of a 3D graphics experiment as an experiential
learning opportunity in an introductory statistics course

\textbf{Running Title:} Experiential learning with 3D graphs

Tyler Wiederich\textsuperscript{1} (twiederich2@huskers.unl.edu)

\emph{\textsuperscript{1} Department of Statistics, University of
Nebraska-Lincoln, NE 68588}

\textsuperscript{*}\emph{To whom correspondence should be addressed}

Dr.~Susan VanderPlas, Department of Statistics, University of
Nebraska-Lincoln, 3310 Holdrege St, Lincoln, NE 68503, E-mail:
susan.vanderplas@unl.edu

\textbf{Keywords:} 3D graphs, statistics education

\section{Conflict of interest
statement}\label{conflict-of-interest-statement}

Susan VanderPlas and Tyler Wiederich do not declare any conflicts of
interest in this research. The mention of software packages is not an
endorsement of those packages. Susan VanderPlas and Tyler Wiederich
produced all material with the exception of all mentioned software
packages.

\newpage

\section{Abstract}\label{abstract}

A key component of statistics courses is to teach students how to
interpret data visualizations. Although many research-based
recommendations exist for creating graphs, the technological advances
for creating such graphs have outpaced studies that evaluate their
effectiveness, especially when considering 3D graphs. Here, we describe
a process for integrating an experiment on 3D graphs as part of a
project on statistical investigations for students enrolled in an
introductory statistics course and gathered responses as students
reflected on their experience of being a participant in the experiment
and then being a reviewer of empirical evidence about the experiment A
total of 82 students participated in our graphics project. As
participants in an experiment, they displayed a pattern of not fully
grasping research objectives as evidence by widely varied responses.
However, as reviewers of material from a pilot study of the same design,
they tended to gain a clearer understanding about the purpose of the
experiment and its role in the realm of data visualizations by correctly
interpreting an extended abstract and video presentation of the pilot
study. The project we presented to students shows promise as an
educational tool for helping students gain a more holistic view of
statistical research, which is important in both the contributions to
data visualizations and the education of statistics.

\section{Introduction}\label{introduction}

The education of statistics emphasizes the use of real data and its
application in answering research questions. Students in introductory
statistics courses are mainly exposed to elementary methods and textbook
examples that demonstrate the application of these methods, which is
used, in part, because of the emphasis on teaching students to think
statistically using real data (\citeproc{ref-carver}{Carver, College,
and Everson 2016}). Many textbooks, such as Tintle et al.
(\citeproc{ref-Tintle2021}{2021}), use scenarios and ask students to
perform the corresponding inferential test. This process is then
repeated over the course material without much deviation in the
instructional method. In some cases, however, students can participate
and benefit from well-designed classroom experiments
(\citeproc{ref-mcgowan2011}{McGowan 2011}). This process can expose
students to concepts such as randomization and let students see the
specifics of experimental design through their participation. Loy
(\citeproc{ref-loy2021a}{2021}) have demonstrated that student
participants often recalled their experiment in later concepts, showing
some evidence that students can benefit from the hands-on experience.

In addition to using experiential learning broadly, a key aspect in the
statistics classroom is teaching students to interpret data through
graphs. Nearly 40 years ago, Cleveland and McGill
(\citeproc{ref-cleveland1984}{1984}) began the process of establishing
good practices for making graphs. While their findings have been
replicated (\citeproc{ref-heer2010}{Heer and Bostock 2010}), many areas
in data visualization remain underdeveloped that can benefit from the
framework used by Cleveland and McGill
(\citeproc{ref-cleveland1984}{1984}). One such area is the projections
of 3D data visualizations. The current mantra is to avoid 3D graphs when
possible and studies around the 1990s
(\citeproc{ref-barfield1989}{Barfield and Robless 1989};
\citeproc{ref-fisher1997}{Fisher, Dempsey, and Marousky 1997}) seem to
provide some valid skepticism of their use. Barfield and Robless
(\citeproc{ref-barfield1989}{1989}) showed that participants were
sometimes more accurate using 3D graphs than 2D graphs, depending on the
participant's experience level. However, participants were generally
more confident with their answers for 2D graphs. Fisher, Dempsey, and
Marousky (\citeproc{ref-fisher1997}{1997}) observed a similar preference
for 2D graphs over 3D graphs when extracting information, but found no
preference for visual appeal for the type of graph. While these results
provided valid skepticism toward the use of 3D graphs, the results are
generalized to the projections of the 3D graphs. The area of ``true'' 3D
graphs is largely unexplored, but advances in technology allow for
easier access to explore the 3D projections of these graphs. Kraus et
al. (\citeproc{ref-kraus2020}{2020}) explored the 3D projections with
the use of virtual reality and found that participants were more
accurate at extracting values from 3D heatmaps at the expense of needing
more time than 2D alternatives.

Because the use of ``true'' 3D graphs remains largely unexplored, it
provides a unique opportunity to be used as an experiential learning
opportunity for statistics students. Not only can students benefit from
the exposure to different graph types, including ``true'' 3D graphs, but
they can also experience a more authentic method of teaching, which is
more likely to be beneficial to reinforce statistical ways of thinking.

In this paper, we used an experiential learning project that employed
different graph types, including ``true'' 3D graphs, in an introductory
statistics classroom environment and describe its potential application
as an educational tool. We presented students with a series of modules
where they first participated in our experiment on different graph
types, followed by acquiring knowledge on the purpose of the experiment
by reading an extended abstract and watching a presentation of a pilot
study of the same experiment.

\section{Methods}\label{methods}

We introduced students enrolled in Introduction to Statistics (STAT 218)
at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln to a graphics project that
contained an experiment and progressively revealing components that
illustrate the experiment's research objectives. The project started by
providing students with minimal information about the research
objectives before revealing the scope of the experiment through an
extended abstract and presentation. The goal of the graphics project was
to observe how students think statistically about experiments as both
participants and research consumers. Students were provided with mostly
open-ended prompts throughout the graphics project, which allowed us to
freely explore common themes in student responses without the limitation
of preset choices.

\subsection{Experiential Learning}\label{experiential-learning}

The graphics project was split into two main components regarding the
interaction of students with the material. In this section, we will
discuss student interactions with the experiment. Students were first
presented with a series of four modules presented from the role of
research participation. These modules contained the informed consent
form, pre-experiment reflection, experiment participation, and
post-experiment reflection. Within the informed consent module, students
were informed that their data would be anonymized and that the
experiment was carried out in accordance with the institutional review
board (Project ID: 22579). While all students were given the option to
participate in the graphics project, we were only able to collect
responses when informed consent was obtained and if the student was 19
years of age. In the pre-experiment reflection, students were asked to
write a paragraph about how they think the process of scientific
investigation looks from the perspective of researchers and the general
public. The experiment participation module asked students to paste the
code generated upon completion of the graphics experiment, which is
detailed in the next section. The generated code serves as a basic check
to indicate whether or not students fully participated in the
experiment. For the post-experiment reflection, students were asked five
questions about the purpose of the experiment. These include questions
on the hypotheses being tested, sources of error, variables of interest,
and elements of experimental design.

After completing the experiment reflections, students moved to the
reflection of the overall research objectives. Students were first
directed to read an unpublished two-page extended abstract that we
submitted as a contributed paper for the Symposium on Data Science \&
Statistics (SDSS). The extended abstract outlined the experiment's
purpose and procedures, but not the results from our initial pilot
study. After reading the extended abstract, students were asked to write
a paragraph about what they found clearer about the experiment's purpose
than when they were a participant. Finally, students were directed to
watch a 12-minute pre-recorded presentation based on an abbreviated
version given at SDSS (\citeproc{ref-wiederich2023}{Wiederich 2023}).
The video contained the same material as the extended abstract and
included the results from our pilot study. The presentation reflection
asked students four questions about the experiment and how information
was presented differently than in the extended abstract.

Except for the informed consent and experiment participation modules,
all student responses were open-ended. Each question and its
corresponding module can be found in Table 1.

Instructors for STAT 218 were recruited for Summer 2023 and Fall 2023 to
administer the graphics project into their classroom. The instructors
were given the option of administering the project as coursework
material or extra credit, along with the liberty of grading at their own
discretion.

\subsection{Graphics Experiment}\label{graphics-experiment}

\subsubsection{Constructing Stimuli}\label{constructing-stimuli}

Based on Cleveland and McGill's seminal work
(\citeproc{ref-cleveland1984}{1984}) on graphical perception,
participants were presented with a series of bar graphs where two bars
are marked with either a circle or a triangle. The heights of the bars
were chosen from the following equation:

\begin{equation}\phantomsection\label{eq-vals}{s_i=10\cdot 10^{(i-1)/12}, \qquad i=1,2,3,...,10}\end{equation}

where \(s_i\) represents a value given an integer \(i\) as defined
above. The values \(s_i\) from Equation~\ref{eq-vals} were then paired
such that the ratio of the smaller value to the larger value yield the
ratios of 0.178, 0.261, 0.383, 0.464, 0.562, 0.681, and 0.825. Each bar
graph has two groupings of five bars. Following the Type 1 and Type 3
graphs from the position-length experiment by Cleveland and McGill
(\citeproc{ref-cleveland1984}{1984}), the value pairs for each ratio
were either placed in the first grouping on the second and third bars
(adjacent), or placed on the second bars in each grouping (separated).

To explore the effect of dimensionality and projection of the bar
graphs, we introduced the following plot types: 2D digital, 3D digital
(static), 3D digital (interactive), and 3D printed. There was no single
software package that could create all four plot types, so we carefully
constructed graphs from different software packages to be as similar as
possible. The 2D digital plots were rendered with the \texttt{ggplot2}
package (\citeproc{ref-ggplot2}{Wickham 2016}). Microsoft Excel® was
used to render the 3D digital (static) plots. The 3D digital
(interactive) and 3D printed plots were created with OpenSCAD®
(\citeproc{ref-kintelOpenSCADDocumentation2023}{Kintel 2023}), where the
generated stereolithography (STL) files for the 3D digital (interactive)
plots were rendered with the \texttt{rgl} package
(\citeproc{ref-rgl}{Murdoch and Adler 2023}).

\subsubsection{Experimental Design}\label{experimental-design}

With 56 treatment combinations, we opted to use an incomplete block
design to provide participants with 15-20 graphs. Kits of graphs were
constructed so that five of the seven ratios are equally represented,
resulting in 21 different kits. Within each kit, all graph types
appeared for each ratio and the comparison type was randomly assigned. A
visual layout of the experiment is shown in Figure 1. All kits received
a unique identifier and a set of instructions for accessing the
experiment.

A Shiny application (\citeproc{ref-shiny}{Chang et al. 2023}) was
designed to administer the experiment. Students were directed to
randomly select a kit of graphs and visit the Shiny application's
website linked on the instructions. For students enrolled in the online
sections of STAT 218, the website was provided by the instructor and
they were prompted in the application to select that they were an online
participant; selecting online participation resulted in the 3D-printed
plots being removed from the set of graphs presented to the participant.
After students provided a kit identifier (if applicable), students were
presented with graphs in a randomized order. If the student marked that
they were an online participant, the 3D-printed graphs were removed from
their experiment lineup. Each graph asked the students to first identify
the larger marked bar and then to guess the height of the smaller marked
bar if the larger marked bar was 100 units tall using a slider widget.
After completing the experiment, a completion code was generated for
students to paste into the experiment participation module.

\subsection{Data Analysis}\label{data-analysis}

Since nearly all of the student responses to the project modules are
open-ended, the analysis of the project modules is qualitative. We will
selectively extract student responses that demonstrate variability and
repetitive themes in their understanding of the graphics experiment. For
paragraph responses, bigram plots are used as a graphical analysis to
display word pairs after removing stop words (e.g., ``the'' and
``and''). These word pairs help illustrate common themes that students
wrote about in their longer prompts. The results of the graphics
experiment are presented by Wiederich and VanderPlas
(\citeproc{ref-wiederich}{n.d.}) as an extension of a larger study
comparing the dimensionality and projections of 2D and 3D bar charts.

\section{Figure Legends}\label{figure-legends}

Figure 1: Visual display of the experimental design for students who
participated in the 3D bar charts experiment. Kits of graphs were
created by first choosing five ratios from nine available options (1).
Each ratio then uses all graph types, with the exception of the
3D-printed graphs for online students (2). Finally, all graphs were
randomly assigned to have the marked bars as adjacent or separated (3).

\section{Results}\label{results}

\subsection{Recruitment of Students and
Instructors}\label{recruitment-of-students-and-instructors}

We recruited 3 instructors for summer and fall semesters in 2023. Each
instructor offered the project as extra credit in their course and
student participation was entirely voluntary. A total of 82 students
participated in the project, and 9 students did not complete the project
completely (Table 2).

\subsection{Selected Responses from Experiment
Participation}\label{selected-responses-from-experiment-participation}

\subsubsection{Pre-Experiment
Reflection}\label{pre-experiment-reflection}

In the first stage of the project, students had limited information
about the research objectives and we recorded how students thought about
scientific research. Before to the experiment, students generally
understood the purpose of scientific research by connecting the ideas of
hypothesis testing and publishing results as demonstrated in the
Pre-Experiment bigram plot from the Pre-Experiment Reflection (Figure
2). Students wrote about scientific research starting from the place of
a question, followed by conducting an experiment and relaying the
results to the public. For example, the most common phrase groupings
include variations of ``scientific research'', ``data collection'', and
``peer review''.

\subsubsection{Post-Experiment
Reflection}\label{post-experiment-reflection}

After participating in the experiment, students were provided prompts
asking about the goals of the research objectives. Some students
correctly identified parts of the questions asked in the post-experiment
reflection, but often missed the objective of comparing the accuracy of
ratio judgements of 2D and 3D graphs.

When students were asked ``What do you think the purpose of the
experiment was?'', one student responded ``They could be trying to
determine how different genders, ages, etc. perceive the sizes of the
bars in the graph. Demographics could make a pretty significant
difference.'' Another student responded ``I think the purpose of this
experiment was for the researcher to gather data on how people perceive,
interpret, and understand 3D graphs.'' A third student correctly
commented ``I think this experiment aimed to test if it was easier to
compare two graphs in 2D or 3D.'' For this question, a complete response
would have included the comparisons of ratio judgements of the
projections for 2D and 3D graphs.

We then asked students ``What hypotheses might the experimenters have
been testing?'' A correct response would include measuring differences
in accuracy of ratio judgements between 2D and 3D graphs. One student
correctly identified this by responding ``They might have been testing
if a 2D model is easier to estimate its relative size to another when
compared to a 3D model of it.'' Other students replied with statements
that would not be able to be measured from the experiment, with one
student responding ``How taking Statistics 218 effects how you can
compare two groups'' and another student saying ``That 2d is preferred
over 3d. It cleans up the data presentation.''

An important topic covered in STAT 218 is randomization, which we asked
students with ``What elements of experimental design, such as
randomization or the use of a control group, do you think were present
in the experiment? Why?'' One student perfectly described randomization
by responding with ``Randomization: The survey used an experimental
design where in the survey there were different sets of 3D charts and
maybe by a randomization process each participant was shown a different
set of charts to see the differences in interpretations of the charts
based on which set was assigned. Control Group: Since this survey aimed
to only understand how participants interpret 3D charts without
comparison to other chart types, then no control group was needed.''
Another student was partially correct with a response of ``Randomization
was used because the ever person got a different graph.'' Other students
missed the utilization of randomization, with one student responding
``random students in the stats class'' and another saying
``Randomization was not used because it was offered as an extra credit
assignment in class.''

\subsection{Selected Responses from Research
Reflections}\label{selected-responses-from-research-reflections}

In this set of reflections, students first read the extended abstract,
followed by watching the 12-minute presentation video. The abstract
unveiled the scope of the study to students, many of whom did not
realize the underlying complexities. Nearly all students responded with
statements about gaining clarity about the purpose the experiment and
its role in testing the differences between 2D and 3D graphs. A bigram
plot of the student responses to the abstract reflection prompt is shown
in Figure 3. Students commented on how they now understood the purpose
of comparing 2D and 3D graphs, and also the potential benefits that may
stem from research, such as graphical accessibility to the visually
impaired.

Lastly, more than half of the students (78.5\%) responded that they
preferred the presentation over the extended abstract when asked ``If
you had to hear about this study using only the extended abstract or
only the presentation, which one would you prefer? Which one would be
better for determining whether the experiment was well designed?'' One
student responded ``I am a visual learner so I would have rather heard
about in through the presentation. It also broke down the steps which is
easier for me to understand. I think the presentation as a whole would
be better for determining how the experiment is designed.'' Another
student said ``Personally I like the abstract better. If I get confused
on something it is so much easier to go back and reread to understand
what is going on. If I ask myself questions about it, it is much easier
to go back and find answers to the questions as well.''

\section{Discussion}\label{discussion}

Taken together, our results support the idea that we achieved our goal
of providing students of an introductory statistics course with the
opportunity to reflect on active research. Students generally
appreciated the progressively revealing nature of the graphics project,
which is evident from the abstract and presentation reflections. When
provided with the post-experiment reflections, students often either
missed the research objective of the experiment or had partially correct
responses. The abstract reflection received many responses indicating
that students had moments of realization about the true nature of our
research goals, which was further expanded in the presentation
reflection prompts. Across all reflections, students were thoughtful,
and sometimes amusing, with their responses and that they were on the
path of statistical thinking.

What we found was that the graphics project found success within the
recommendations of the GAISE College Report
(\citeproc{ref-carver}{Carver, College, and Everson 2016}). Students
were able to demonstrate their ability to think statistically through
the series of reflections. The graphics project made use of real data,
along with data collection, within the scope of an approachable and
field-related topic, which allowed for students to see how scientific
research is conducted in the field of statistics.

A limitation of our study is the use of open-ended responses that do not
objectively assess student learning. While the student responses were
useful in gathering insight, the responses are widely varied and do not
have direct comparisons of statistical thinking throughout the modules.
Another limiting factor is tiered layering of convenience sampling, with
instructors being recruited before recruiting students, which impacts
the generalization of our findings. Nonetheless, the 82 students who
participated provided meaningful answers that displayed a level of
statistical thinking throughout the graphics project.

Future studies could use a similar framework to conduct experiments on
more typical 3-dimensional data, such as heatmaps. The use of graphical
experiments in the classroom not only provides a readily available
convenience sample, but also adheres to the recommendations of the GAISE
College Report (\citeproc{ref-carver}{Carver, College, and Everson
2016}). With the framework we provided in this paper, we aim to make
adjustments to further improve the graphics experiment and corresponding
project as an experiential learning opportunity.

\section{Acknowledgments}\label{acknowledgments}

We would like to thank the Department of Statistics at University of
Nebraska-Lincoln and the instructional team behind Introduction to
Statistics (STAT 218) for administering the experiment to students.

\section{Author Contributions}\label{author-contributions}

Susan VanderPlas created the framework of the graphics project,
submitted documentation to the Institutional Review Board for approval,
and provided contributions for the code used to collect responses. Tyler
Wiederich designed the experiment, wrote the code for administering the
experiment, recruited and trained instructors, analyzed data, and wrote
the manuscript.

\section{References}\label{references}

Link to journal citation style:
\href{https://www.tandfonline.com/action/authorSubmission?show=instructions&journalCode=ujse21\#refs}{here}

\phantomsection\label{refs}
\begin{CSLReferences}{1}{0}
\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-barfield1989}
Barfield, Woodrow, and Robert Robless. 1989. {``The Effects of Two- or
Three-Dimensional Graphics on the Problem-Solving Performance of
Experienced and Novice Decision Makers.''} \emph{Behaviour \&
Information Technology} 8 (5): 369--85.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1080/01449298908914567}.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-carver}
Carver, Robert, Stonehill College, and Michelle Everson. 2016.
{``Guidelines for Assessment and Instruction in Statistics Education
(GAISE) College Report.''}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-shiny}
Chang, Winston, Joe Cheng, JJ Allaire, Carson Sievert, Barret Schloerke,
Yihui Xie, Jeff Allen, Jonathan McPherson, Alan Dipert, and Barbara
Borges. 2023. {``Shiny: Web Application Framework for r.''}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-cleveland1984}
Cleveland, William S., and Robert McGill. 1984. {``Graphical Perception:
Theory, Experimentation, and Application to the Development of Graphical
Methods.''} \emph{Journal of the American Statistical Association} 79
(387): 531--54. \url{https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.1984.10478080}.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-fisher1997}
Fisher, Samuel H., John V. Dempsey, and Robert T. Marousky. 1997.
{``Data Visualization: Preference and Use of Two-Dimensional and
Three-Dimensional Graphs.''} \emph{Social Science Computer Review} 15
(3): 256--63. \url{https://doi.org/10.1177/089443939701500303}.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-heer2010}
Heer, Jeffrey, and Michael Bostock. 2010. {``CHI '10: CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems.''} In, 203--12. Atlanta Georgia USA:
ACM. \url{https://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753357}.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-kintelOpenSCADDocumentation2023}
Kintel, Marius. 2023. {``{OpenSCAD}. {OpenSCAD}.org.''} July 17, 2023.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-kraus2020}
Kraus, Matthias, Katrin Angerbauer, Juri Buchmüller, Daniel Schweitzer,
Daniel A. Keim, Michael Sedlmair, and Johannes Fuchs. 2020. {``CHI '20:
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.''} In, 1--14.
Honolulu HI USA: ACM. \url{https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376675}.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-loy2021a}
Loy, Adam. 2021. {``Bringing Visual Inference to the Classroom.''}
\emph{Journal of Statistics and Data Science Education} 29 (2): 171--82.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1080/26939169.2021.1920866}.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-mcgowan2011}
McGowan, Herle M. 2011. {``Planning a Comparative Experiment in
Educational Settings.''} \emph{Journal of Statistics Education} 19 (2):
4. \url{https://doi.org/10.1080/10691898.2011.11889612}.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-rgl}
Murdoch, Duncan, and Daniel Adler. 2023. {``Rgl: 3D Visualization Using
OpenGL.''}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-Tintle2021}
Tintle, Nathan, Beth L Chance, George W Cobb, Allan J Rossman, Soma Roy,
Todd Swanson, and Jill VanderStoep. 2021. \emph{Introduction to
Statistical Investigations}.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-ggplot2}
Wickham, Hadley. 2016. {``Ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data
Analysis.''}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-wiederich2023}
Wiederich, T. 2023. {``Evaluating Perceptual Judgements on 3D Printed
Bar Charts,''} May.
\url{https://twiedrw.github.io/3d_graphical_perception/SDSS_presentation/index.html}.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-wiederich}
Wiederich, T, and S VanderPlas. n.d. {``Placeholder: A Comparative
Experiment on Projections of 2D and 3D Bar Charts.''}

\end{CSLReferences}

\newpage

\section{Figures}\label{figures}

Figure 1: Visual display of the experimental design for students who
participated in the 3D bar charts experiment. Kits of graphs were
created by first choosing five ratios from nine available options (1).
Each ratio then uses all graph types, with the exception of the 3D
printed graphs for online students (2). Finally, all graphs were
randomly assigned to have the marked bars as adjacent or separated (3).

Figure 2: Bigram of student responses to the pre-experiment prompt. Each
line represents pairs of words that appeared together where each pair
occurred at least twice. Students generally understood that science is
about investigating research questions and collecting data.

Figure 3: Bigram of student responses to the abstract reflection prompt.
Each line represents pairs of words that appeared together where each
pair occurred at least twice. Students generally understood that science
is about investigating research questions and collecting data.

\newpage

\section{Tables}\label{tables}

\begin{table}

\caption{\label{tab:unnamed-chunk-4}Questions provided to students in each project module.}
\centering
\fontsize{10}{12}\selectfont
\begin{tabu} to \linewidth {>{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{9em}>{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{6em}>{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{25em}}
\toprule
Reflection & Question & Prompt\\
\midrule
Pre-Experiment & Q3 & In this class, you'll be learning about the process of scientific investigation. What do you think that process looks like, from the perspective of a researcher, compared to what it looks like from the perspective of someone in the general public who is a consumer of scientific results? Write a paragraph (at least 3-5 sentences) about how you think science happens.\\
\cmidrule{1-3}
 & Q5 & What do you think the purpose of the experiment was?\\
\cmidrule{2-3}
 & Q6 & What hypotheses might the experimenter have been testing?\\
\cmidrule{2-3}
 & Q7 & What sources of error are involved in this experiment?\\
\cmidrule{2-3}
 & Q8 & What variables were examined? For each variable, identify whether it was quantitative or categorical.\\
\cmidrule{2-3}
\multirow{-5}{*}{\raggedright\arraybackslash Post-Experiment} & Q9 & What elements of experimental design, such as randomization or the use of a control group, do you think were present in the experiment? Why?\\
\cmidrule{1-3}
Abstract & Q10 & What components of the experiment are clearer now than they were as a participant? What questions do you still have for the experimenter? Write 3-5 sentences reflecting on the abstract.\\
\cmidrule{1-3}
 & Q11 & How did the information you gained from the components of this project (participation, post-study reflection, extended abstract, presentation) differ?\\
\cmidrule{2-3}
 & Q12 & What components were emphasized in the presentation that weren't emphasized in the abstract? Why do you think that is?\\
\cmidrule{2-3}
 & Q13 & What critiques do you have of this study and its design? What would have made the study better?\\
\cmidrule{2-3}
\multirow{-4}{*}{\raggedright\arraybackslash Presentation} & Q14 & If you had to hear about this study using only the extended abstract or only the presentation, which one would you prefer? Which one would be better for determining whether the experiment was well designed?\\
\bottomrule
\end{tabu}
\end{table}

\begin{table}[H]

\begin{threeparttable}
\caption{\label{tab:unnamed-chunk-5}Number of valid student participants by semester.}
\centering
\begin{tabular}[t]{lrr}
\toprule
Semester & Number of Sections & Number of Students\\
\midrule
Summer 2023 (May-June) & 1 & 17\\
Summer 2023 (July-Aug) & 1 & 23\\
Fall 2023 (May-June) & 1 & 42\\
\bottomrule
\end{tabular}
\begin{tablenotes}
\small
\item [] Students under 19 years of age or did not consent were exluded from data collection. To comply with IRB, no demographic information was collected to keep students anonymous with their reflections.
\end{tablenotes}
\end{threeparttable}
\end{table}



\end{document}
